<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI: Leyden</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Leyden</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It seemed that from some church tower far away a clock struck the hour of midnight when the sledge at last came to a halt.</p>
			<p>Worn out with nerve-racking thoughts, as well as with the cruel monotony of the past four hours, Gilda felt her soul and body numb and lifeless as a stone. There was much running and shouting round the vehicle, of horses’ hoofs resounding against rough cobblestones, of calls for ostler and landlord.</p>
			<p>Then for awhile comparative quietude. Maria still snored unperturbed, and Gilda, wide-eyed and with beating heart, awaited further events. Firstly the hood of the sledge in which she lay was lifted off: she could hear the ropes and straps being undone, the tramp of feet all round her and an occasional volley of impatient oaths. Then out of the darkness a pleasant voice called her somewhat peremptorily by name.</p>
			<p>“Mejuffrouw Beresteyn!”</p>
			<p>She did not reply, but lay quite still, with wide-open eyes like a bird that has been tracked and knows that it is watched. Maria uttered a loud groan and tried to roll over on her side.</p>
			<p>“Where have those murderers taken us to now?” she muttered through the veil that still enveloped her mouth.</p>
			<p>The pleasant voice close to Gilda’s ear, now called out more loudly:</p>
			<p>“Here, Pythagoras, Socrates! lift the <i xml:lang="nl">mevrouw</i> out of the sleigh and carry her up to the room which the landlord hath prepared for the ladies.”</p>
			<p>Maria immediately gave vent to violent shrieks of protest.</p>
			<p>“How dare ye touch me!” she screamed at the top of her voice, “ye murdering devils dare but lay a finger on a respectable woman and God will punish you with pestilence and dislocation and⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>It must be presumed that neither Pythagoras nor Socrates were greatly upset by the <i xml:lang="nl">mevrouw</i>’s curses, for Gilda, who was on the alert for every movement and for every sound, was well aware that Maria’s highly respectable person was presently seized by firm hands, that the shawl round her face was pressed more tightly against her mouth⁠—for her screams sounded more muffled⁠—and that despite her struggles, her cries and her kicking she was lifted bodily out of the sledge.</p>
			<p>When these disquieting sounds had died down the same pleasant voice broke in once again on Gilda’s obstinate silence.</p>
			<p>“Mejuffrouw Beresteyn!” it reiterated once again.</p>
			<p>“<span xml:lang="nl">Dondersteen</span>! but ’tis no use lying mum there, and pretending to be asleep,” it continued after awhile, since Gilda certainly had taken no notice of the call, “that old woman made enough noise to wake the dead.”</p>
			<p>Still not a sound from Gilda, who⁠—more like a cowering bird than ever⁠—was trying with widely-dilated eyes to pierce the darkness around her, in order to see something of the enemy. She saw the outline of a plumed hat like a patch of ink against the sky above, and also a pair of very broad shoulders that were stooping toward the floor of the sledge.</p>
			<p>“Hey!” shouted the enemy with imperturbable cheerfulness, “leave that door wide open, I’ll carry the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> in myself. She seems to be unconscious.”</p>
			<p>The words roused Gilda out of her attitude of rigid silence⁠—the words which she looked on as an awful threat, and also the sensation that the loose bonds which had pinioned her down to the vehicle were being undone.</p>
			<p>“I am not unconscious,” she said aloud and quite calmly, “and was quite aware just now that you laid rough hands on a helpless woman. Since I am equally helpless and in your power I pray you to command what I must do.”</p>
			<p>“Come! that’s brave! I knew that you could not be asleep,” rejoined the enemy with inveterate good-humour, “but for the moment, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>, I must ask you to descend from this sleigh. It has been a vastly uncomfortable vehicle for you to travel in, I fear me, but it was the best that we could get in Haarlem on New Year’s day. An you will deign to enter this humble hostelry you will find the <i xml:lang="nl">mevrouw</i> there, a moderately good supper and something resembling a bed, all of which I am thinking will be highly acceptable to you.”</p>
			<p>While the enemy spoke, Gilda had a few seconds in which to reflect. Above all things she was a woman of sense and one who valued her own dignity; she knew quite well that the making of a scene outside an inn in a strange town and at this hour of the night could but result in a loss of that dignity which she so highly prized, seeing that she was entirely at the mercy of men who were not likely to yield either to her protests or to her appeals.</p>
			<p>Therefore, when she felt that she was free to move, she made every effort to raise herself uncomfortably; these long hours of weary motionless lying on her back, had made her limbs so numb that they refused her service. She made one or two brave attempts to hide her helplessness, but when she wanted to draw up her knees, she nearly cried with the pain of trying to move them out of their cramped position.</p>
			<p>“It were wiser methinks,” quoth the enemy with a slight tone of mockery in his cheerful voice, “it were wiser to accept the help of my arms. They are strong, firm and not cramped. Try them, <span xml:lang="nl">mejuffrouw</span>, you will have no cause to regret it.”</p>
			<p>Quite involuntarily⁠—for of a truth she shrank from the mere touch of this rascal who obviously was in the pay of Stoutenburg, and doing the latter’s infamous work for him⁠—quite involuntarily then, she placed her hand upon the arm which he had put out as a prop for her.</p>
			<p>It was as firm as a rock. Leaning on it somewhat heavily she was able to struggle to her knees. This made her venturesome. She tried to stand up; but fatigue, the want of food, the excitement and anxiety which she had endured, combined with the fact that she had been in a recumbent position for many hours, caused her to turn desperately giddy. She swayed like a young sapling under the wind, and would have fallen but that the same strong arm firm as a rock was there to receive her ere she fell.</p>
			<p>I suppose that dizziness deprived her of her full senses, else she would never have allowed that knave to lift her out of the sledge and then to carry her into a building, and up some narrow and very steep stairs. But this Diogenes did do, with but scant ceremony; he thought her protests foolish, and her attempts at lofty disdain pitiable. She was after all but a poor, helpless scrap of humanity, so slight and frail that as he carried her into the house, there was grave danger of his crushing her into nothingness as she lay in his arms.</p>
			<p>Despite her pride and her aloofness he found it in his heart to pity her just now. Had she been fully conscious she would have hated to see herself pillowed thus against the doublet of so contemptible a knave; and here she was absolutely handed over body and soul to a nameless stranger, who in her sight, was probably no better than a menial⁠—and this by the cynical act of one who next to her father was her most natural protector.</p>
			<p>Yes, indeed he did pity her, for she seemed to him more than ever like that poor little songbird whom a lout had tortured for his own pleasure by plucking out its feathers one by one. It seemed monstrous that so delicate a creature should be the victim of men’s intrigues and passions. Why! even her breath had the subtle scent of tulips as it fanned his cheeks and nostrils when he stooped in order to look on her.</p>
			<p>In the meanwhile he had been as good as his word. He had pushed on to Leyden in advance of the cortège, had roused the landlord of this hostelry and the serving wenches, and scattered money so freely that despite the lateness of the hour a large square room⁠—the best in the house, and scrupulously clean as to the red-tiled floor and walnut furniture⁠—was at once put at the disposal of the ladies of so noble a travelling company.</p>
			<p>The maids were sent flying hither and thither, one into the kitchen to make ready some hot supper, the other to the linen press to find the finest set of bed linen all sweetly laid by in rosemary.</p>
			<p>Diogenes, still carrying Gilda, pushed the heavy panelled door open with his foot, and without looking either to right or left of him made straight for the huge open hearth, wherein already logs of pinewood had been set ablaze, and beside which stood an armchair, covered with Utrecht velvet.</p>
			<p>Into its inviting and capacious depths he deposited his inanimate burden, and only then did he become aware of two pairs of eyes, which were fixed upon him with very different expressions. A buxom wench in ample wide kirtle of striped duffle, had been busy when he entered in spreading clean linen sheets upon the narrow little bed built in the panelling of the room. From under her quaint winged cap of starched lace a pair of very round eyes, blue as the Ryn, peeped in naive undisguised admiration on the intruder, whilst from beneath her disordered coif Maria threw glances of deadly fury upon him.</p>
			<p>Could looks but kill, Maria certes would have annihilated the low rascal who had dared to lay hands upon the noble <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span>. But our friend Diogenes was not a man to be perturbed either by admiring or condemning looks. He picked up a footstool from under the table and put it under the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span>’s feet; then he looked about him for a pillow, and with scant ceremony took one straight out of the hands of the serving wench who was just shaking it up ready for the bed. His obvious intention was to place it behind the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span>’s head, but at this act of unforgivable presumption Maria’s wrath cast aside all restraint. Like a veritable fury she strode up to the insolent rascal, and snatched the pillow from him, throwing on him such a look of angry contempt as should have sent him grovelling on his knees.</p>
			<p>“Keep thy blood cool, <i xml:lang="nl">mevrouw</i>,” he said with the best of humour, “thy looks have already made a weak-kneed coward of me.”</p>
			<p>With the dignity of an offended turkey hen, Maria arranged the pillow herself under her mistress’s head, having previously shaken it and carefully dusted off the blemish caused upon its surface by contact with an unclean hand. As for the footstool, she would not even allow it to remain there where that same unclean hand had placed it; she kicked it aside with her foot and drew up her small, round stature in a comprehensive gesture of outraged pride.</p>
			<p>Diogenes made her a low bow, sweeping the floor with his plumed hat. The serving wench had much ado to keep a serious countenance, so comical did the <i xml:lang="nl">mevrouw</i> look in her wrath, and so mirth-provoking the gentleman with his graceful airs and unruffled temper. Anon laughter tickled her so that she had to run quickly out of the room, in order to indulge in a fit of uncontrolled mirth, away from the reproving glances of <i xml:lang="nl">mevrouw</i>.</p>
			<p>It was the pleasant sound of that merry laughter outside the door that caused the <span xml:lang="nl">jongejuffrouw</span> to come to herself and to open wide, wondering eyes. She looked around her, vaguely puzzled, taking in the details of the cosy room, the crackling fire, the polished table, the inviting bed that exhaled an odour of dried rosemary.</p>
			<p>Then her glance fell on Diogenes, who was standing hat in hand in the centre of the room, with the light from the blazing logs playing upon his smiling face, and the immaculate whiteness of his collar.</p>
			<p>She frowned. And he who stood there⁠—carelessly expectant⁠—could not help wondering whether with that swift contemptuous glance which she threw on him, she had already recognized him.</p>
			<p>“Mejuffrouw,” he said, thus checking with a loud word the angry exclamation which hovered on her lips, “if everything here is not entirely in accordance with your desires, I pray you but to command and it shall be remedied if human agency can but contrive to do so. As for me, I am entirely at your service⁠—your majordomo, your servant, your outrider, anything you like to name me. Send but for your servant if you have need of aught; supper will be brought up to you immediately, and in the meanwhile I beg leave to free you from my unwelcome company.”</p>
			<p>Already there was a goodly clatter of platters, and of crockery outside, and as the wench reentered anon bearing a huge tray on which were set out several toothsome things, Diogenes contrived to make his exit without encountering further fusillades of angry glances.</p>
			<p>He joined his friends in the taproom downstairs, and as he was young, vigorous and hungry he set to with them and ate a hearty supper. But he spoke very little and the rough jests of his brother philosophers met with but little response from him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
