<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI: The Counsels of Prudence</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Counsels of Prudence</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Neither Stoutenburg nor any of the others had made reply to Beresteyn’s firmly spoken oath. They were hardheaded Dutchmen, every one of them: men of action rather than men of words: for good or ill the rest of the world can judge them forever after by their deeds alone.</p>
			<p>Therefore when the spectre of betrayal and of subsequent death appeared so suddenly before them they neither murmured nor protested. They could not in reason blame Beresteyn for his sister’s presence in the cathedral this night, nor yet that her thoughts and feelings in the matter of the enmity between the Stadtholder and the Barneveld family did not coincide with their own.</p>
			<p>Silently they walked across the vast and lonely cathedral and filed one by one out of the western door where Perk still held faithful watch. Stoutenburg, their leader, had his lodgings in a small house situate at the top of the Kleine Hout Straat, close to the well-known hostelry at the sign of the Lame Cow. This latter was an hostelry of unimpeachable repute and thither did the six friends decide to go ere finally going home for the night.</p>
			<p>It had been decided between them some time ago that those who were able to do so would show themselves in public as much as possible during the next few days, so as to ward off any suspicion of intrigue which their frequent consorting in secluded places might otherwise have aroused.</p>
			<p>Out in the open they thought it best to disperse, electing to walk away two and two rather than in a compact group which might call forth the close attention of the night watchmen.</p>
			<p>Stoutenburg linked his arm in that of Beresteyn.</p>
			<p>“Let the others go on ahead,” he said confidentially, “you and I, friend, must understand one another ere we part for this night.”</p>
			<p>Then as Beresteyn made no immediate reply, he continued calmly:</p>
			<p>“This will mean hanging for the lot of us this time, Nicolaes!”</p>
			<p>“I pray to God⁠ ⁠…” exclaimed the other hoarsely.</p>
			<p>“God will have nought to say in the matter, my friend,” retorted Stoutenburg dryly, “ ’tis only the Stadtholder who will have his say, and do you think that he is like to pardon.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Gilda will never.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, she will,” broke in Stoutenburg firmly; “be not deluded into thoughts of security. Gilda will think the whole of this matter over for four and twenty hours at the longest, after which, feeling herself in an impasse between her affection for you and her horror of me, she will think it her duty to tell your father all that she heard in the cathedral tonight.”</p>
			<p>“Even then,” said Beresteyn, hotly, “my father would not send his only son to the gallows.”</p>
			<p>“Do you care to take that risk?” was the other man’s calm retort.</p>
			<p>“What can I do?”</p>
			<p>“You must act decisively and at once, my friend,” said Stoutenburg dryly, “an you do not desire to see your friends marched off to torture and the scaffold with yourself following in their wake.”</p>
			<p>“But how? how?” exclaimed Beresteyn.</p>
			<p>His was by far the weaker nature of the two: easily led, easily swayed by a will stronger than his own. Stoutenburg wielded vast influence over him; he had drawn him into the net of his own ambitious schemes, and had by promises and cajolery won his entire allegiance. Now that destruction and death threatened Nicolaes through his own sister⁠—whom he sincerely loved⁠—he turned instinctively to Stoutenburg for help and for advice.</p>
			<p>“It is quite simple,” said the latter slowly. “Gilda must be temporarily made powerless to do us any harm.”</p>
			<p>“How?” reiterated Beresteyn helplessly.</p>
			<p>“Surely you can think of some means yourself,” retorted Stoutenburg somewhat impatiently. “Self-preservation is an efficient sharpener of wits as a rule, and your own life is in the hands of a woman now, my friend.”</p>
			<p>“You seem to forget that that woman is my sister. How can I conspire to do her bodily harm?”</p>
			<p>“Who spake of bodily harm, you simpleton?” quoth Stoutenburg with a harsh laugh, “ ’tis you who seem to forget that if Gilda is your sister she is also the woman whom I love more than my life⁠ ⁠… more than my ambition⁠ ⁠… more even than my revenge.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He paused a moment, for despite his usual self-control his passion at this moment threatened to master him. His voice rose harsh and quivering, and was like to attract the notice of passersby. After a moment or two he conquered his emotion and said more calmly:</p>
			<p>“Friend, we must think of our country and of our faith; we must think of the success of our schemes: and, though Gilda be dear to us both⁠—infinitely dear to me⁠—she must not be allowed to interfere with the great object which we hope to attain. Think out a way therefore of placing her in such a position that she cannot harm us: have her conveyed to some place where she can be kept a prisoner for a few days until I have accomplished what I have set out to do.”</p>
			<p>Then as Beresteyn said nothing, seeming to be absorbed in some new train of thought, Stoutenburg continued more persuasively:</p>
			<p>“I would I could carry her away myself and hold her⁠—a beloved prisoner⁠—while others did my work for me. But that I cannot do: for ’twere playing the part of a coward and I have sworn before the altar of God that I would kill the Stadtholder with mine own hand. Nor would I have the courage so to offend her: for let me tell you this, Nicolaes, that soaring even above my most ambitious dreams, is the hope that when these have been realized, I may ask Gilda to share my triumph with me.”</p>
			<p>“Nor would I have the courage so to offend my sister⁠ ⁠… my father,” said Beresteyn. “You speak of carrying her off, and holding her a prisoner for eight days perhaps, or even a fortnight. How can I, her own brother, do that? ’Tis an outrage she would never forgive: my father would curse me⁠ ⁠… disinherit me⁠ ⁠… turn me out of house and home.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“And will he not curse you now, when he knows⁠—when tomorrow mayhap, Gilda will have told him that you, his son, have joined hands with the Lord of Stoutenburg in a conspiracy to murder the Prince of Orange⁠—will he not disinherit you then? turn you out of house and home?”</p>
			<p>“Hold on for mercy’s sake,” exclaimed Beresteyn, who bewildered by the terrible alternative thus put ruthlessly before him, felt that he must collect his thoughts, and must⁠—for the moment at any rate⁠—put away from him the tempter who insinuated thoughts of cowardice into his brain.</p>
			<p>“I’ll say no more, then,” said Stoutenburg quietly, “think it all over, Nicolaes. My life, your own, those of all our friends are entirely in your hands: the welfare of the State, the triumph of our faith depend on the means which you will devise for silencing Gilda for a few brief days.”</p>
			<p>After which there was silence between the two men. Beresteyn walked more rapidly along, his fur-lined cloak wrapped closely round him, his arms folded tightly across his chest and his hands clenched underneath his cloak. Stoutenburg on the other hand was also willing to let the matter drop and to allow the subtle poison which he had instilled into his friend’s mind to ferment and bring forth such thoughts as would suit his own plans.</p>
			<p>He knew how to gauge exactly the somewhat vacillating character of Nicolaes Beresteyn, and had carefully touched every string of that highly nervous organization till he left it quivering with horror at the present and deathly fear for the future.</p>
			<p>Gilda was a terrible danger, of that there could be no doubt. Nicolaes had realized this to the full: the instinct of self-preservation was strong in him; he would think over Stoutenburg’s bold suggestion and would find a way how to act on it. And at the bottom of his tortuous heart Stoutenburg already cherished the hope that this new complication which had dragged Gilda into the net of his own intrigues would also ultimately throw her⁠—a willing victim⁠—into his loving arms.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
